# quickref: mastering tmux

to master tmux, there are only a few things you need to learn.

## Contents

* keyboard shortcuts
* concepts (controlling tmux from the shell)
* commands
    * `list-commands`
    * `list-keys`
    * `list-*`
    * `show-options`
    * `show-window-options`
    * `show-*`


## keyboard shortcuts

The most important keyboard shortcut to learn is `<prefix>?`.  It is the default
shortcut for showing you a list of every other keyboard shortcut.

If I were to suggest any other shortcuts, they would probably be `<prefix>[`,
`<prefix>]`, and `<prefix>=`.  These shortcuts are for switching into copy-mode and pasting what
was last copied.  The last one, `<prefix>=`, shows you a list of all text that
has been copied, and lets you choose the one to paste.

## concepts

This next tip is probably the most powerful one.

You can control tmux by running tmux commands from any shell prompt.  For
example, let's say the current tmux window has 2 panes, split horizontally.  By
default, the panes are equal in size.  However, let's assume that you want the
bottom pane to only take up 5 rows.  If you move focus to the bottom pane, and
you run the following shell command: `tmux resize-pane -y 5`, then tmux will
know which pane you are in, and set that pane's height to 5 rows/lines.

This same technique can by used to build all kinds of complex scripts, and it
gives you an enormous amount of control over tmux.

As a side note, this is possible, because all tmux panes set 2 environment
variables:

1. `TMUX` - the file that represents the tmux session
2. `TMUX_PANE` - the id to use when having a tmux command target the current pane
  For example: `tmux resize-pane -y 5 -t $TMUX_PANE` is another way of running
  the same command as earlier.

## commands

There are probably 4 commands that every tmuxu user should know:

1. `list-commands` - lists every possible tmux command with all possible options
2. `list-keys` - lists all configured keyboard shortcuts, the same thing as
   typing `<prefix>?` inside a tmux session
3. `show-options` - lists all configurable tmux options
4. `show-window-options` - lists all configurable tmux options that affect the
   current window.

Learning all of these commands, and how to use them to manipulate tmux, will let
you do anything you can imagine with tmux, as long as tmux is capable of doing
it.

#tmux
